Lagos, Nigeria Housing for young professionals is a potentially lucrative, untapped business opportunity in the Nigerian property sector, according to Abayomi Onasanya, founder of student housing developer Student Accommod8. There is a huge demand in the build-to-rent sector from young professionals who have a decent income but are unable to rent suitable apartments. Rather than a large three-bedroom apartment, these young adults are looking for 45 square metres, one-bedroom apartments, with shared utility rooms that are close to transport hubs. “Young adults tend to leave first thing in the morning and socialise after work; they generally come home to sleep, so the space need not be too large,” he says. Onasanya discovered this demand when Student Accommod8 opened its first student residence, a high-end development with single rooms, costing $2,500 per annum. All the enquiries in the first week were from young professionals working in the Lagos central business district. It was in a good transport hub, 20 minutes from the centre. It took a lot to turn down that revenue and focus on students, he recalls. Previously young people lived at home until they got married but there has been a culture shift with more young graduates moving closer to city centres and transport for work. “Years ago, it was unheard of for a female to live outside the home but it has become more culturally acceptable.” Nigeria-based Spleet's mission is to change the way people live together and re-define the future of urban shared-living for working professionals, millennials and digital nomads. The fastest-growing urban centres are the small towns with less than 300,000 people. Demand for new purpose-built student accommodation across sub-Saharan Africa is anticipated to exceed 500,000 beds over the next five years. A selection of business opportunities in Africa that have come across our desk. Affordable housing options have not caught up with the rate of population growth and urban migration. Tempohousing Nigeria specialises in providing flexible and affordable residential and commercial spaces using standard shipping containers.