Jeremy Leach Jeremy Leach is the founder and CEO of Inclusivity Solutions, a company which designs, builds and operates digital insurance products. It partners with mobile operators, banks, insurance firms and other financial institutions to deliver simple and affordable insurance cover through mobile phones. The company has launched digital insurance initiatives in Côte d’Ivoire, Rwanda and Kenya, in partnership with Orange, Airtel and Equity Bank’s Equitel respectively. In May 2020, Inclusivity Solutions secured an additional $1.3 million in the second tranche of its series A round, bringing the total series A fundraising to $2.6 million. Its investors include Goodwell Investments, UW Ventures (in partnership with Allan Gray) and MFS Africa. The business was started in 2015 and has its head office in Cape Town, South Africa. There are quite a few as you would expect from having chosen to found a startup in one of the hardest spaces in financial services – insurance in under-penetrated markets. But one of the most stressful was facing our ‘Day Zero’ at the end of 2018. Instead of running out of water, as Cape Town’s Day Zero countdown was tracking, we were coming perilously close to running out of funding. Thankfully and with particular appreciation to a friend, Dare Okoudjou – who prompted Goodwell Investments to expedite their assessment of us – and Nic Botha, representing Allan Gray and Umkhathi Wethu – who contacted us out of nowhere – we were able to secure a great series A with amazing investors. But it was a very close run. There are many, but the ones that stand out are: I have been at one FailFaire conference and whilst I speak regularly at events, I have never been so uncomfortable in my life. This question feels something like that. I am generally very impatient and like to get things done fast and I expect that of other people too. However, a previous mentor once told me the following after I was pushing things too hard at a large corporate: “Leadership is like a piece of tinned spaghetti which you must drag from one side of the table to another. If you drag it too fast, it will break up behind you so you will get to the end with no one behind you. The art of leadership is to drag that piece of spaghetti from one side to the other whilst keeping the spaghetti intact.” I have taken this to heart and restrained my impulses as far as I am able. The tricky thing is that on the team we also had very impatient people so I had to try and navigate between those pushing hard and those who weren’t ready for it. It is was a tough balancing act because I am on the side of the impatient. I was advised that we needed to focus our energies and not spread ourselves too thin. That makes a lot of sense if you can control your destiny and speed. However, when you are partnering with large corporates like banks, mobile network operators and insurers it doesn’t matter how much you focus, you can’t get them to move any faster than they are willing to go. So, I wish we had spent more time innovating and testing with smaller players and following a few more rabbit holes at the beginning rather than focusing too much attention on our big three “supertankers”. I am not sure it is necessarily entrepreneurship per se, but there were two areas which I would have wished I could have known more about: Further reading [July 2020] The journey so far: Mdingase Tewete, managing director, Kombeza Foods (Malawi)
[July 2020] The journey so far: Dare Okoudjou, CEO, MFS Africa
[July 2020] The journey so far: Abraham Cambridge, CEO, Sun Exchange (South Africa)
[July 2020] The journey so far: Segun and Ronke Abiona, founders, Nicole and Giovanni (Nigeria)
[June 2020] The journey so far: Faiz Bashir, CEO, FlexiSAF (Nigeria)