Eunice Maina Bismart is a Kenya-based insurance aggregator, allowing its users to compare and buy various insurance products from multiple companies. The business was started in 2017. Founder Eunice Maina answers our questions. Bismart is an online insurance marketplace where insurance firms list their products and customers are able to compare the policies. We recently introduced a feature that allows our users to compare policies based on other customers’ reviews – similar to what hotel booking platforms offer. We bring much-needed transparency to the insurance industry, which increases insurance literacy and awareness, especially for the youth. The insurance companies pay us a commission for every customer who buys through the Bismart platform. I financed it from savings. I worked at an insurance company for eight years. We would allocate some of the money towards technology to make the platform more efficient. Some of it would also be spent on marketing and expansion from Kenya to other African countries. Regulation. The insurance industry regulator doesn’t exactly know how to regulate the kind of business we are running. We face the risk that one day the regulator might wake up and decide we need to do business in this way or that way. We also face reputational risk. If an insurance company listed on our platform does something wrong to a customer, the customer might blame us, even though it is completely out of our hands. A screenshot of the Bismart platform Google ads and search engine optimisation (SEO). With SEO you don’t really put in money – as a startup you always look for ways to get the maximum outcome with minimal input. We also focus a lot on developing social media content that educates customers about insurance. When we won the Standard Chartered Women in Tech award. We were hardly six months into the business and then we won the award. This was a validation that we were onto something. Initially I started the business with a partner. However, down the line we realised our visions were not aligned. My partner didn’t take it lightly and blocked the entire platform. I had to start everything from scratch. Bismart was not the original business name. I had to register a new company without the partner. I should have taken more time to choose the correct partner. It is important that all partners are aligned. It is also important to document what happens in the event that you disagree. All this needs to be done way in advance before you get into it. Further reading [July 2020] Zambian company spots opportunity for locally-made spices and pastes
[July 2020] Ugandan real fruit ice lolly business has ambitious expansion plans
[July 2020] Senegal’s Yobanté Express seeks to make parcel delivery more efficient
[July 2020] Nigerian entrepreneur discusses the ups and downs of the waste recycling business
[June 2020] The Ethiopian entrepreneur who wants to disrupt the paper industry