Ahmed Mohamed Yusuf Currently over 67% of Somalis, especially the most vulnerable communities, use mobile money technology as a sole payment system. If this stops, an entire population will be unable to buy the necessities – food, pay for hospital treatments and education for their children. With the ongoing violence in the country, keeping my employees safe is also a top priority. These are the important operational and commercial questions keeping me awake at night. The biggest misconception is that Somalia is a war-torn country, continuously in a state of conflict and operating in the country is impossible. Hormuud and telecommunications firms in Somalia are some of the most innovative companies in Africa, contributing to the rapidly growing and vibrant economy. My rural background, with my father as a camel herder, has certainly steered my business career. But the people of Somalia, at home and abroad, have also greatly impacted my career. They helped me when my first business faltered as a result of the civil war and the government collapsed. Wanting to give back and to provide life-changing services, I founded Hormuud Telecom. Without the Somali people, I wouldn’t be the successful businessman that I am. Return to Somalia in order to help my communities connect with their relatives abroad during a turbulent political climate has been key to founding a pioneering mobile money service. My belief in a politically stable and economically prosperous Somalia has been the key reason for my professional success. I have dedicated my working life to contributing to the post-conflict economic development and making a difference, no matter how small, to my country and Somali communities. Jogging in the evenings through the streets of Mogadishu helps me relax. Physical exercise is a great way to change up the daily routine from the daily office setting. I’m awake by 04:00 and reach my desk by 07:30. Every day brings new challenges and opportunities and therefore an early start is necessary for this to happen. I don’t think I’ve ever undertaken a job interview. I’ve been entirely self-employed throughout my career. What I consider the biggest perk is having the trust of the Somali people. Nothing brings me greater joy than delivering superior services to our consumers. Hormuud Telecom, founded in 2002, is a Somali telecommunications firm leading the drive towards a cashless economy in Somalia.