An Ubuntu employee delivering fresh produce Zambian company Ubuntu Meal Delivery Services delivers food from restaurants and fresh produce from local farmers to its clients in the Lusaka region. The business was started in 2017. Co-founder and CEO David Mbuta answers our questions. Ubuntu is an online food delivery as well as fresh produce storage and delivery service operating within a 20km radius of the Lusaka central business district. I financed our startup through investing early in family real estate when I came back from Australia as well as from my savings from having worked in Australia. The rentals have helped me sustain the business. Seed funding from The Tony Elumelu Foundation helped us buy our first bikes and get our first staff and office. It would go into acquiring additional bikes with additional riders, branding of the bikes and setting up remote satellite solar-powered cold rooms. We will also invest the money in four refrigerated trucks – two for local transportation to assist farmers with logistical challenges in getting their fresh produce to the cold rooms, and the other two for cross-border transportation to assist farmers to sell their produce across the border. Furthermore, we would appoint extra staff to manage each cold room as well as additional customer service staff. Lastly, we would buy bikes for our Malawi site. Ubuntu’s courier motorbikes The risk we face is a lack of disposable income to spend on our services. In addition, there are tight cross-border regulations. Current border controls and regulations don’t allow for the free flow of goods, with high taxes and duties on goods. The hope is that we would eventually have a free trade zone that opens up borders for easier trading. We need more open borders to allow for the international delivery of fresh produce. Currently, this is very difficult. Establishing sister companies in neighbouring countries is also affected by strict regulations in terms of licences, documents and the testing of fresh produce. Social media and word of mouth. Winning seed funding from The Tony Elumelu Foundation, which allowed us to buy our first bikes. An e-commerce platform giving customers access to qualified artisans such as plumbers, carpenters, electricians, mechanics, builders and painters. Talking business with Alan Chanda, founder of Zambian honey business Dytech. Taimba is a Nairobi-based agtech startup that runs a cashless platform connecting rural small scale farmers to urban retailers. Astral Foods recently opened a broiler breeding farm and hatchery in Zambia. Jaco Maritz talks to Astral's Roedolf Steenkamp about Zambia’s poultry industry. Like all venture capital-backed startups, Zoona has been through its fair share of ups and downs. Sage Valley is a Zambian company which produces spices and pastes from locally sourced ingredients. Online meal ordering platform grows consumer base in Nairobi.