Brice Ludovic Bindzi Mvogo, founder and CEO of Freshbag Freshbag, launched in 2019, is a digital platform that connects farmers to urban retailers in Cameroon. The company buys products from farmers and distributes them to street vendors in the capital Yaoundé. Freshbag recently received investment from GreenTec Capital Partners. Founder Brice Ludovic Bindzi Mvogo (34) answers our questions. Freshbag connects thousands of farmers and street vendors to its fair and reliable procurement marketplace, providing them with the necessary services (procurement, logistics and financials) to help their businesses thrive and be more resilient. Part of the startup’s initial funds was love money (friends and family) and my own savings. The bulk of the funding would go towards expansion of our distribution and logistics capabilities across Cameroon and Africa. There are more than 2 million food and FMCG street vendors in Cameroon alone and we are only able to serve a fraction of that demographic at the moment. The main risks are tied to the people we serve. Informal street vendors – because they live in constant uncertainty – are often unreliable and reluctant to engage in formal contracts. Our loyalty and reward programmes are in part gradually solving that issue but we still have a long way to go in changing attitude and behaviour. Word of mouth and affiliate marketing. If a street vendor sees a business opportunity he will tell its friend and so on. Street vendors are a tightly connected community. Being able to afford staff wages from our own revenues. It is a huge milestone when you know how hard it is to make it in Africa. I had to let go of one of our important team members because of a misdemeanor that was tarnishing our brand image. This was someone I put my trust in. They say business is all about people; it is even more true when you are small and starting and where every little penny counts. Surrounding yourself with the right people is one of the hardest tasks in order to build a successful company. No one can teach you how to select the right people and often you will choose the wrong ones. I’ve learnt this is part of the process; now I can part ways with underperforming staff without resenting myself too much.  Fabrice Alomo is the Cameroonian entrepreneur behind an innovative business that aims to solve many of the challenges surrounding online shopping in his country. Amitruck is a startup that allows transporters (owners of motorbikes, pick-ups, vans and trucks) to find and connect with customers through a mobile app. African entrepreneurs cannot easily satisfy preconceived notions of venture-backed businesses, while solving problems in a scalable and sustainable (and profitable) way. "Africa was booming and my dreams seemed more feasible over there." We speak to Gerhard Visagie, co-founder of AgVentures, to find out more about the firm’s investment strategy and the opportunities he sees in the agri-tech industry. Farmcrowdy founder, Onyeka Akumah, tells us about the risks facing the business and his most exciting entrepreneurial moment.