Alan Chanda Dytech is a Zambian business which produces honey under the brand name SweetHarvest. The company, launched in 2016, has its own bee farms and also sources honey from a large network of small-scale farmers (outgrowers). Dytech has developed innovative beehives, called ZamHives, which increases honey yields from 15kg to 75kg per season. Founder Alan Chanda answers our questions. Dytech is an agribusiness that works with rural communities to produce high-value honey for export to global markets. The honey is sourced mostly from outgrower farmers. We have designed a commercially scalable model using our low-cost, highly-productive ZamHives made from unwanted wood waste and offcuts. These hives are provided to the outgrower farmers. We will soon also start producing sweets – lollipops, candy and lozenges – from pure honey as well as sweeteners for tea and coffee. Some 95% of all the honey is exported and 5% is sold in Zambia. We sell to two major chain stores and 200 shops across Zambia. ZamHives is a spacious double-deck beehive that attracts bees by mimicking the natural environment and creating an atmosphere like the inside of the tree trunk. This encourages bees to settle and produce honey. It would go towards scaling our outgrower scheme across carefully selected African countries. We would build 250,000 beehives and plant high-value commercially-scalable export-grade foods – such as mangoes and avocados – to create opportunities for our outgrowers to have more than one income stream. We would also use the money to realise our ambition of producing sweets and drink sweeteners. Early entrants into the market include COMACO, Forest Fruits and Ubuchi. The industry is very competitive. Most of our competitors only source honey from one of the provinces in Zambia, which has driven up prices. There has also been little innovation in terms of new products (such as sweets) and beehives (such as our ZamHives technology). Dytech sources honey from four provinces in Zambia. We produce the lowest priced honey in Zambia due to innovation and our scalable relationships with partners. Harvested honey packed in drums, ready for export. Some of our partner farmers are engaged in side selling. We would sign an agreement with them, but then they would sell some honey to our competitors. If we catch our honey outgrowers side selling, we take away their ZamHives. Another challenge is deforestation. Some people have this tradition of burning wild forests to easily trap animals. It is essential to have partnerships with the government and local chiefs to ensure the forests are kept in pristine condition. Without their support, it is very difficult to secure the forests as honey production areas. The 2011/2012 agriculture season looks bright and promising for YamBEEji Honey and Rice Products, a processing firm based in the rural areas of Zambia. Unpacking Bee Sweet Ltd's innovative business model. Honey Care Africa is growing beekeeping farms to satisfy demand for honey. 'Entrepreneurship can be likened to a maze. You know where to start, you see the finish but the path from start to end is a process.' Kenyan honey producer, Honey Care Africa, has trained thousands of small-scale farmers to practice commercial beekeeping. Dinfin Mulupi reports Many African countries are still searching for inclusive commercial farming models that can bring in private investment without dispossessing local people.