Raki Ben Mohamed Kooka Niamey, based in the West African country of Niger, produces ice cream using local ingredients and flavours. The company was started in 2019. Founder Raki Ben Mohamed (41) answers our questions. Kooka revisits the traditional Italian gelato with ingredients and flavours from West Africa such as baobab, camel milk, shea fruit or local cereal porridge. The idea is to promote the re-discovery of local fruits, herbs and cereals through high-quality ice cream. At the same time, the company is supporting local suppliers of those ingredients, providing them with sustainable revenue. The company was financed through my private savings which I earned during my 15 years in corporate finance. These savings enabled me to finance my gelato training in Italy and invest in professional machines for ice cream production, in packaging and in delivery containers. A tub of Kooka ice cream made with dates from northern Niger It would go towards: Kooka faces two major risks: We found that direct marketing works best. Kooka has been participating in school and agricultural fairs. Contact with end customers is very important as we can answer their questions directly. My most exciting entrepreneurial moment was at the national agricultural fair in February 2020. That is when I would say the company was officially launched. Before that, I was delivering ice cream to family and friends mostly. During this fair, visitors and fairgoers discovered Kooka and the brand was launched. Kooka won the first innovation price in its category for the magaria (local jujube) ice cream. My biggest mistake was not conducting market research prior to launching our products. Kooka delivers ice cream in small individual cups and did not invest in larger, family-size containers which are in demand. I will now make sure to consider market studies before any important investments or changes. Mercy Kitomari is founder and CEO of Nelwa’s Gelato, an ice cream business operating in the financial hub of Dar es Salaam. Krystal Ice is a Ugandan company that makes frozen snacks from real fruit. The business was started in 2017. Founder Linnet Akol (43) answers our questions. How bottled water and soft drinks producer Belvie captured significant market share in a relatively short period. Polyoak Packaging is partnering with local ice cream manufacturers in Africa to offer convenient single-serve plastic cups with spoon-in-lid for on-the-go consumption. Sage Valley is a Zambian company which produces spices and pastes from locally sourced ingredients. Tapping into Africa's five largest drivers will undoubtedly increase your chance of success.