Russel Luck SwiftVee is a South African agricultural trading platform that first went live in 2019. It recently received $1.5 million investment from Subtropico Ltd, an investment company with a focus on the agricultural services sector and related value chain. Founder Russel Luck (35) answers our questions. SwiftVee is an agri-tech livestock trading platform. It uses artificial intelligence technology to match buyers and sellers in real-time to optimise sales levels from anywhere in the world. Through the data gathered via online auctions, SwiftVee creates credit risk profiles and customer-use profiles which are used by the financial services industry to gain granular customer insights. SwiftVee aspires to become the Amazon of livestock trading and the Bloomberg of agricultural data. A blend of government seed funding with a follow-on investment round by a consortium of tech investors for series A. We have identified extremely high demand in other African countries, the UK and the US. We would invest money into product developers and engineers to scale and maintain excellent products. We would also invest in account managers and back-office support to maintain top levels of service throughout our expansion. Our only risks are macro-economic challenges experienced by all entrepreneurs across the continent. Issues like currency devaluations, corruption and mismanagement of public resources, lack of stable electricity and internet, all pose a risk to scaling a world-class company. However, African businesses breed resilience and creativity and we wouldn’t choose to be anywhere else in the world. The time and opportunity for innovation in Africa is now. Becoming the biggest online livestock trading platform was a special moment in our business trajectory. However, raising over $2.5 million was an exciting moment as it signalled to South Africa that SwiftVee has arrived. We haven’t made a mistake in this regard, but the biggest lesson is to believe in the people you work with. The more time you spend selecting a strong team and creating a culture of excellence, the better your company will do in the market. The agri sector is replete with valuable data that is currently under-utilised. Readily available data can be used to create products such as farm-to-fork reporting, credit scores and risk analysis reporting. The data can also be used to forecast optimal times to farm. We speak to Gerhard Visagie, co-founder of AgVentures, to find out more about the firm’s investment strategy and the opportunities he sees in the agri-tech industry. Charlie Tryon, CEO of investment firm Maris Ltd., talks investment opportunities in sub-Saharan Africa and reveals his thoughts about doing business in frontier markets such as Zimbabwe and South Sudan. We speak to South African entrepreneur Ntuthuko Shezi, whose company enables anyone to invest in farming assets such as a free-range ox or a macadamia nut tree. We speak to Mobolaji Adeoye, founder and chief investment officer of Consonance Investment Managers. 'Imagine someone in South Korea who owns a camel in Somalia,' says founder who quit his UN job to launch an online livestock trading business. The market is growing fast, but continues to be dominated by imports.