Kwami Williams How we made it in Africa speaks to Kwami Williams, CEO of MoringaConnect, a Ghanaian company which manufactures food and personal care products from the moringa tree. Its brands include Minga Foods and True Moringa. The business also supplies bulk moringa oil, tea and powder to brands across the world. I was born and raised in Accra, Ghana. Ever since I can remember, I was obsessed with things that flew and with taking things apart to see how they worked.
⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀⠀
I emigrated to the US after my family won the diversity visa lottery. I spent my middle and high school years in Baltimore, where my parents worked multiple jobs to offer my brother and me the best shot at the ‘American dream’. I studied aerospace engineering at MIT and interned at two NASA space centres thinking that would be my future. Through two trips back to Ghana during university, I got to see rural poverty up close for the first time. These experiences gave me a complete change of heart, igniting a journey from aerospace engineering to agriculture. I packed my bags and moved back to Ghana in 2013 to start building what would become MoringaConnect. While working with rural farmers in Ghana during the MIT D-Lab class trip, my co-founder, Emily Cunningham, and I learnt about the moringa tree. NGOs had told farmers to plant moringa for nutritional benefits: gram for gram, the leaves of the tree contain more vitamin A than carrots, more protein than yoghurt and more calcium than milk. The seeds of the tree contain a deeply moisturising oil for hair and skincare that outperforms argan, coconut and shea oils. However, without a market, farmers grew trees only at the household scale, receiving little to no economic benefit from it. Since becoming operational in 2014, we have built a network of 5,000 farming families cultivating two million moringa trees. We provide direct farmer training. We cold-press the moringa seeds into seed oil and process the moringa leaves into leaf powder. We use our oil and powder ingredients to manufacture health products – tea, supplement powder and energy bars – in Ghana and we work with women- and Black-owned manufacturers in the US to create our finished line of hair, face and body beauty products. Through our True Moringa brand, we create health and beauty products powered by nutrient-rich moringa. We’re on a mission to make wellness accessible by bringing underutilised superfood ingredients to underserved people on the continent and beyond. The natural beauty and wellness space is quite competitive and crowded. Our social impact and vertically integrated supply chain have helped us to differentiate from others. In the US, we sell our branded products online and our biggest physical retailer is Whole Foods. In Ghana, we also sell online and our biggest physical retailer is Melcom. Since the onset of Covid-19, we have focused on e-commerce channels and have seen good growth there. We also provide bulk moringa oil and moringa powder to global B2B partners. MoringaConnect products on display at a retail store. We start at the farm, providing the tools and training farmers need to grow moringa. Our outgrower farmers are registered and organised into a cohort through a village savings and loan association group that meets regularly with a True Moringa field officer. Through these groups, farmers receive training on financial literacy and best practices for cultivating moringa. Field officers map each farm using GIS technology and a custom-built traceability app. Officers visit farms monthly to provide support to farmers throughout the growing and harvest cycle. We provide a guaranteed market for all of the moringa that farmers produce, helping them to earn between four and 10 times what they might earn growing subsistence crops alone. Working with smallholder farmers has been challenging on every level: from building community trust and maintaining a consistent line of communication, to the logistical hurdles of reaching rural areas due to poor infrastructure. It has also been incredibly rewarding to see the benefits the income from moringa can bring to individual farmers and the effect it has on the community as a whole. Farmers report spending their increased income on healthcare and higher education for their children as well as investments in small businesses in their communities. There is a perception among small natural beauty brands that the key to success is getting into as many physical retailers as possible. However, getting on the shelf is just the first step and supporting sales takes time and resources. In our early days, we made the mistake of chasing retail opportunities and, in hindsight, we should have put more emphasis on building direct-to-consumer online sales. What has worked is storytelling and involving our customers and audience in our story; being vulnerable about what we’re going through as a business in hard times and celebrating good news and exciting milestones through email, social media and in-person events (in pre-Covid times). Harvested moringa leaves Like most businesses in Africa, we’ve seen it all: applications being ‘lost’ for 12 months because we wouldn’t give in to corruption; persistent and unpredictable electric power outages that increase your costs; and significant depreciation of the local currency. I think our toughest challenge came in 2019 in the form of farm and factory fires just four months apart. I thank God no one was hurt but the fire burnt 15,000 trees and led to $1 million in lost revenue, burnt assets and inventory. We spent much of 2019 restructuring and in a strange way, these back-to-back challenges made our team more resilient to deal with everything 2020 has thrown our way with the global pandemic and economic downturn. In response to 2019 and 2020 challenges, we doubled down on our True Moringa website and brand, created new products, unlocked new revenue channels in the USA, created an online revenue channel in Ghana (Thrive Together), reduced our team, streamlined costs, and repurposed assets. The sacrifices and strategic shifts are helping us grow at over 140% year-on-year in 2020. This question is hypothetical for most entrepreneurs, but in light of the fires we had in 2019, we have the opportunity to answer it practically. Here are the things we are doing differently that have unlocked triple-digit revenue growth in 2020, despite the Covid-19 pandemic: Moringa oil seeds are processed into personal care and beauty products. We speak to Teddy Ruge, founder and CEO of Raintree Farms, about his journey so far and the potential of the moringa crop. When Catherine Krobo Edusei first took her freshly grown herbs to the local supermarket in Accra, the manager didn’t know what they were. We speak to Gregory Kankoh, CEO of Groupe Nallem STM, a Ghanian fashion and retail group. Talking business with Audrey Cheng, co-founder and CEO of Moringa School. Adowarim Lugu-zuri, CEO of Wazuri Ghana Limited, sees untapped opportunity in Ghana’s coconut industry. 'I'm proud of starting a micro-initiative from my kitchen, with less than $10, that became a medium-scale agribusiness listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange.'