 Press Office: Djembe Consultants Djembe Consultants, the award-winning Africa-focused communications consultancy, today launched its latest Insights Report in partnership with AfriLabs, the largest pan-African network of technology and innovation centres. The report assesses the impact of COVID-19 on the continent’s young innovators and entrepreneurs and provides perspectives from industry experts as to how African decisionmakers from both the public and private sectors can accelerate support across the full innovation spectrum including education, inclusivity, investment, policy and research and development. The report was launched during a panel discussion at the virtual 5th AfriLabs Annual Gathering. Entitled Building a Resilient Innovative Africa, the report is a result of a survey of over 1,000 pan-African innovators, entrepreneurs, and start-ups from both Djembe’s and AfriLabs’ vast innovation and entrepreneurship networks. Framed within the context of key milestones for the continent, including the impending African Free Trade Continental Area (AfCFTA), UN SDGs, and the African Union Agenda 2063, the report also brings together the expert perspectives of individuals from some of the continent’s leading development and private sector organisations including the African Union, African Development Bank, Afreximbank, Honoris United Universities, Mastercard Foundation, Mozilla, SMART Africa, and UN Women amongst others. It features unique insights from regional innovations hubs as well as celebrates inspiring African homegrown innovation success stories. Djembe Consultants’ Chief Executive Officer, Mitchell Prather, commented, “Djembe’s latest Insights Report reaffirms our strongly held belief that the African innovation ecosystem is singularly the most important enabler of widespread socio-economic development. Despite the innate resilience African innovators and SMEs have shown during this challenging year, this ecosystem urgently needs further intervention of policymakers and industry supporters to create a more conducive environment for innovators and SMEs to survive and thrive. While the uncertainties of COVID-19 continue to threaten economic stability and growth, future economic prosperity can be greatly enhanced by nurturing the African innovation spirit to prepare the continent for incredible success, just when it needs it most.” Anna Ekeledo, Executive Director at AfriLabs and contributor to the report, added, “The continent’s survival DNA, always durable to internal and external shocks of all shapes and forms, proves a resilience in its youthful demographic, one that is constantly creating, innovating, and looking ahead. Though we are have observed policymakers and governments step up to varying degrees, more needs to be done to drive greater innovation inclusivity from securing access to data, to reimagining education, investing in R&D and supporting international expansion. By building a more resilient innovative Africa, the region can truly embrace its full potential.” The full report can be accessed online here. Djembe Consultants was recently appointed as the Official Communications Partner for AfriLabs and will be developing customised training workshops for AfriLabs’ community members and partner hubs across the continent. Follow Djembe Consultants on social media for further updates. djembeconsultants.com Djembe Consultants has partnered with AfriLabs to develop a report on the future of African innovation amidst a backdrop of a global pandemic. An award-winning team of communications specialists has officially launched Djembe Consultants. Djembe Consultants is a communications consultancy with a difference, committed to amplifying an African narrative based on opportunity, growth and innovation. A pan-African open call inviting submissions for the seventh edition of the Innovation Prize for Africa (IPA) awards from 10 October 2017 to 10 January 2018. Rwanda selected due to its strong commitment towards building a knowledge economy and shaping ICT policies that catalyse African innovation. Ghana’s selection as host country for IPA 2017 comes as a result of its commitment towards consolidating a thriving national innovation ecosystem.